---
layout: post
title: Javascript vs. Ruby
excerpt: "The fascinating differences between these two programming languages!"
modified:
categories: articles
tags:
image:
  feature: so-simple-sample-image-1.jpg
  credit: WeGraphics
  creditlink: http://wegraphics.net/downloads/free-ultimate-blurred-background-pack/
comments: true
share: true
---


<!-- This and self -->

I come at Javascript with a Ruby background. Not having programmed in any other languages, I can't help but compare the two! Here are some initial observations, quirky differences, or things that I find just plain interesting:

- In Javascript syntax, there is no `end` to if statements. In Ruby there is most definitely an `end`. Unfortunately I seem to find the javascript more forgettable - I keep forgetting those semicolons!! Ex:

Javascript:
{% highlight javascript %}
if (alert) {
  print 1;
} else {
  print 2;
};
{% endhighlight %}

Ruby:
{% highlight ruby %}
if alert == true
  print 1
else
  print 2
end
{% endhighlight %}

- Javascript makes global and local variables a little more transparent than Ruby. In Javascript you have to declare variables (e.g.: `var x = 8`). If you don’t declare a variable inside of a function (`x = a + b`) then you will be resetting the variable x you had declared earlier to the evaluation of a + b. I think this is a bit more transparent than it is in Ruby. In Ruby you just have to KNOW that x = 8 in one context and x = something else in another context. The `var` declaration in Javascript makes this concept more explicit - nothing is hiding if you know the rule! An important disclaimer: I'm still learning about closures... maybe this observation is wrong and I just don't know it yet!

- Javascript uses semicolons to explictly end a line of code. A semicolon says to the interpreter: "hey, this is one discrete line of code, run it as a unit, yo." For some reason this really appeals to my brain. Perhaps it's the explicit-ness of the whole thing, making it feel like you're in charge of the program instead of it being in charge of you? The more I learn about Javascript, the more I feel that Ruby is sort of... running me instead of the other way around!

- Javascript has functions, but it also has methods. Ruby, on the other hand, calls everything a method (idiomatically, there are no 'functions' in Ruby). As far as the difference between a Javascript function and a Javascript method: as far as I can tell, Javascript's functions are actually things you program yourself. So if I wanted a function that incremented a variable by one, I would write that functionality in the body of the function and then go ahead and call that function. Javascript *methods*, on the other hand, are pre-programmed functions - they sort of hide the code. Case in point: the map method! In Javascript the map method will take an array and modify the elements of the array according to whatever parameters you've indicated. It will then spit out an array with the modified values. Calling `.map` on an array modifies each element in the array without you having to write any sort of loop.

- Javascript demands an explicit `return` in each function, whereas Ruby will evaluate and spit out the last line of code in the method. Interesting! Different!

- Javascript has `this` while Ruby has `self`. As far as I can tell, they both are indicative of the same concept - they both refer to the object in which they're being called. That object could be a function/method or referring to the class to which the object belongs. Objects in Javascript are still a bit confusing to me. I'm not sure what the Javascript equivalent of a Ruby class is yet, more pondering to come on that as I get further along.

- Calling a variable as an actual function in Javascript means that you have to put parentheses and a semicolon at the end of the variable. For example, let's say you had a function that told you how many lemmings had fallen off the cliff and you were storing that function in a variable called `lostLemmings`. You would *call* the function by referring to the variable like: `lostLemmings();`. But if you didn't want to store the function in a variable, you could remove the variable and *immediately invoke* the function by adding `();` to the end of the function expression. Without this syntax, the function cannot be called in Javascript.

<!-- {% highlight javascript %}
lostLemmings();
{% endhighlight %}

 -->
<!-- var numLemmings = 100
seconds = 0

lostLemmings = calcLemmings

function calcLemmings (numLemmings, seconds) {
  seconds--
  return numLemmings -= seconds
}




<!-- - Declared functions versus function expressions. I think function expressions are also known as anonymous functions. There are anonymous functions and named functions (declared functions)... -->


<!-- - THis is wrong: You can return functions in Javascript, without them being evaluated. Weird! In Ruby, I'm pretty sure that you can't simply return methods. Those methods will be evaluated and you will return a value - I don't think you can actually return the method itself. In Javascript, you can! I think this is called an immediately invoked function? So let's say we I'm not sure what implications this has yet but it sure seems super cool. -->

These are initial observations and the more I work with Javascript, the more I'll add!
